# Community Engagement Tools and Best Practices

## ðŸ” Overview

Keeping your community engaged is important if you want to keep contributions coming. Contributors are more likely to join a community that is well engaged and responsive. There are various ways to engage your community.

## ðŸ§© Community Platforms

### Choosing a Community Platform

There are many options to choose from when it comes to community platforms. Two recommended platforms are:

- [GitHub Discussions](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions) takes the least effort to setup if your project repository is on GitHub.However, according to users GitHub is mainly used for technical developments rather than as a forum.
- [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/) is an open source platform that provides various features for community discussions and tools for moderation. WHO has been using Discourse for several internal and external projects.

- Before selecting a platform, it is important to check whether the users that we are planning on engaging are already members of an existing community in order to avoid duplications and, when possible, maintain the same platform where users are already familiar. In all cases, the selected platform should be user-friendly and compliant with data privacy and protection rules for WHO.
- 
> â„¹ **Note:** For WHO projects, reach out to the WHO OSPO or IMT if you would like support setting up your community platform.

### Managing your Community Platform

Your community needs to be a safe, inclusive, and inviting space for everyone to participate. Every community should have someone or a group of people who take on the role of a community manager. The community manager should:

- monitor the community platform to ensure everyone is following the code of conduct 
- take appropriate action when the code is broken, or escalate matters to a governance committee for appropriate action and resolution
- ensure response times are kept reasonably low to encourage participation and engagement
- help keep the community platform well organized to make it easy for people to use, for example, by maintaining a clear list of discussion categories and provide guidance on how to post
- promote engagement on the community platform by encouraging people to post or by posting what they have heard from people

Before openining a community, the community manager should ensure that there is content planning covering at least the initial month of community's activity.

### Evaluating your community

It is important to set metrics and indicators to evaluate your community's success over time. 

Metrics and indicators can refer to the purpose why the community has been built, and to how healthy and alive the community is. In both cases, an ongoing evaluation of your community is a useful exercise to understand whether there is a need to maintain the community, whether the invested resources are appropriate, and whether the users are getting a significant value from participating.

Metrics can include quantitative data generated by the system, such as pages visited, time spent over articles, number of users, active users, new posts etc. For complex Organizations such as WHO, however, it is recommended that the evaluation is also complemented by qualitative data and feedback. This will include users interviews, surveys, discussions, and qualitative analysys of trends.

An examples of metrics adopted by WHO Open Source Projects is [here](https://worldhealthorganization.github.io/world-health-org-metrics).


## ðŸ“… Community Events

Community events are a good way to drive engagement. Both in-person and online events provide an opportunity for community members to get to know one another and promote a sense belonging.

- As much as possible, plan consistent community events to keep your community engaged. These can be monthly, quarterly, or every 6 months.
- Maintain a public community calendar or list with upcoming events to help your community members plan attendance in advance.
- Have a code of conduct for community events just as you have one for your community platform.
- Use community events as an opportunity to hear other voices besides the project leaders and maintainers, for example, invite contributors and users to share their stories, painpoints, or ideas.

## ðŸ”— Links to Useful Resources

- [Building an Inclusive Open Source Community](https://todogroup.org/guides/diversity-inclusion/)

## ðŸ’¬ How the Open Source Programme Office Can Support Your Work

If you have questions, would like to make an existing project open source, or start a new project that you would like to be open source, please reach out at opensource@who.int
